Good afternoon. I'm a research scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Center for Bits and Atoms. I know the name of the Center is very provocative, and indeed, we do a lot of things with a lot of bits, including bio-bits. And today, I want to talk to you about bio-nanotechnology. This is an emerging science where we learn from how biology does things, and then we steal, copy, emulate, mimic the ways of biology - first by understanding, and then by co-opting, and we make engineering out of it. What drives us, mostly, is curiosity. We've recognized that to understand something, just like Richard Feynman said, you have to first build it. If you don't know how to build something, you don't understand it. If we don't know how to build a photosynthetic solar cell, we don't really understand photosynthesis very well. If we don't know how to build an electronic nose to mimic the dog's nose, let's say, we don't really understand olfaction, the sense of smell. So, that's what drives us - it's basically curiosity. But most of the time, when you start with a basic, curiosity-driven endeavor, you almost always end up with applications that are very, very interesting.

So, that's the best way to describe it, I think: just go over a couple of things that we've done lately in the lab, so you get a sense of how this works. What do those things really look like? What does our everyday life look like in the lab? And at the end, I'd like to maybe tell you how you can participate in this process and feel a sense of ownership of science, because that is changing everybody's life - whether you like it or not - and it will continue changing the way we live, the way we interact with each other, and the planet, in an always accelerating way.

So, let's talk a little bit about design versus evolution. Designed by humans, it's much faster than evolution; but oftentimes, we get inspired by evolved designs or structures. For instance, we were inspired by birds to create the Wright Flyer. By one, it flew for a distance smaller than from me to the last person here in the audience. Everybody made fun of it because it was a rickety machine - and not two generations later, it could fly twice the speed of sound, going from Paris to New York, sipping a little bit of champagne. You could be alive and conscious; it could be ten years old when the Wright brothers made their first rickety machine that mimicked birds. And you could still ride the Concorde, still in one lifetime.

And the way technology works now, and science works now, we are much faster than this - because of computers, because of the internet, because of global availability of information, because of things like Wikipedia. Those things are changing the world. And one of the biggest ways that the world is changing is by accelerating the pace of technological advancements.

What does this mean for bio-nanotechnology? Well, just like we adapted some biologists' designs, now we're starting to domesticate molecules. This is a quote by a colleague and good friend, Professor Susan Lindquist from MIT, who received the Science Prize from Obama in 2010. And she says that about 10,000 years ago, we started domesticating plants and animals - and now it's time to domesticate molecules. And that's what we do now.

Think about it; let this detonate in your head for a second: we started 10,000 years ago with a wolf, and now we have - who knows? - 10,000 different kinds of dogs. Some are good at herding sheep; others are good at going down holes and finding rats. Others are good companions; others can help the blind; others can smell cancer and diagnose it. And we did this by directed evolution - so we bred the dogs to have certain characteristics. Now that process is faster than natural selection, but nowhere near as fast as designed design, I should say, for lack of a better word - or designed evolution, which is what we do now.

And we're now doing it at the level of molecules. DNA, you can think of it - loose analogy - as being the software of life and the software of this bio-nanotechnology; and proteins are the hardware. So, proteins are the machines that DNA codes for - it's sort of like DNA is the blueprint, and the things that make you do things, like the muscles in my arms and the receptors in my eyeballs that allow me to see, and the receptors in my nose allowing me to smell.

And today, we're going to talk about two kinds of proteins. They're both membrane proteins - that means they like to live inside a cell's membrane, having water on both sides; not very good environment for something you want to integrate with electronics. But they are all factory receptors - these are the things that allow you to sense the environment by the scent, by the sense of smell, also known as olfaction; and electrolysis and photosynthesis, which are conferred by the proteins called photosystems. And those two processes are at the very basic level behind everything that's living.

You eat solar energy when you eat meat or vegetables - those things essentially store solar power. Plants take the sunlight and create C-H bonds, create their own flesh - like literally eating the Sun. When you put gas in your car, that is stored solar power; the plants started for you; the dinosaurs ate the plants; they fell into the various millions of years ago; they got compacted into this black goo; now we extract that; we burn it; and we'll make energy that way.

So, how about we short-circuit all that whole process and get the energy directly out of the Sun by using what photosynthesis does? Here is my playground - my place. This is the kind of stuff that I play with: molecules. Let's start from maybe a nanometer or so, and they go up all the way up to maybe a few hundred nanometers in the case of polymers; and we can engineer them and play with them.

And just like here's an example - on the left side is photosystem one; this is at the heart of the Earth's energy cycle. This is what captures light, makes it into chemical energy, which then you can eat or put in your gas tank after the dinosaurs eat. So, on the right is how we engineered the system - we note that we almost took everything directly from nature; we're not that good yet. We're not to the point where we are with airplanes; you don't see jet engines made out of feathers.

But for bio-photovoltaics, we're still taking a lot straight out of the green stuff - that is both good and bad. It's good because green stuff is very cheap and easy to combine; it's bad because it's finicky and complex and difficult to work with. But what you see on the right is one of the world's first ever bio-photovoltaics, meaning it's a solar panel making electricity the same way that plants capture sunlight and make chemical energy.

The first step in making the chemical energy for the plant is to create a little bit of electricity - so we hijack that function and create solar panels with the reason we can do this nowadays because we have this molecular playset, kind of like a Lego set of designed short molecules that allows us to stabilize these proteins outside of their natural environment. These things are used to living inside of a cell's membrane - same as our factory receptors I'll talk about in a second.

And they like to be between two places that are full of water - that's not very good for electronics. But we found out that if we can apply these stabilizing peptides to them, it's essentially putting them in stasis; so these proteins are still alive, in a sense, but outside of their natural environment - they're still doing what they do in the plant, but no longer inside of the plant. So, they've been domesticated - it's just like the wolf is no longer the wolf; it's now the dog that's helping you.

Now, this is a diagram - very scientific. I'm not going to go through it, but people often ask me: what does it look like? What do I mean by all these cartoons? But how do you actually interact with these things? And it's a little bit like being in a submarine - you don't see the other guy; you have to look at all the screens and the donors and things like this. So, everything is graphs and output, and sometimes you have pictures - but most of the time we don't.

And we have pictures like this, which is how we explain how we stabilize these molecules - but it's like our tune now. We're not only trying to figure out how photosynthesis works, but we also wondered whether we can, by lowering the cost of the raw material that you need to make a solar panel, maybe we can really disrupt the way that electricity is being consumed and produced around the world - and bring it to people who have none.

So, we looked at very different sources, and we can use pretty much anything green, including seaweed. And we care about that because it's the only thing that I know of that has a negative cost of the raw material - you pay people to take your grass clippings away. Imagine if those grass clippings could now be made into solar panels.

So, we did this, and it became very famous; it went to the Boston Museum of Science. But the problem is, because you have to have a monolayer - very thin layer of these proteins - the thing did not absorb enough light. In fact, if you look at the bottom center, the reporter who took that picture is cheating: they put it in a green background so that you can see that the chip is actually green - because I guess "green technology" that's actually green in color resonates really well with the public.

So, the problem here is that it wasn't thick enough; it didn't absorb enough light. And if it doesn't absorb enough light, it's not giving enough energy. So, I was trying to solve this problem, and I was in Japan - and I looked at this tree. If you look at the tree down the middle, it's sort of cheating with respect to its little brothers and sisters by having leaves down its trunk. Whatever light trickles down from the top, this tree gets to eat it; the others don't.

So, we decided: do the same thing - make a nano forest. Now, people spoke about failure earlier - so important to realize that 90% of what we do is failure. We cannot go forward in research without having a very thick skin for failure. So, this is an example of a failure: we decided we're going to make these nano-trunks out of carbon nanotubes - and that would have been great.

But then the problem was: we should have seen this coming. The nanotubes are very black, so whatever light doesn't get absorbed by the first layer gets absorbed by the nanotubes - gets changed into heat instead of electricity. Not very useful. But just like the other speaker said, it's important to try; it's important to do things, then fail, then try again.

So, if black nano-trunks for the nano forests are too bad, what's the next best thing? Well, something that is clear, transparent - and in fact, we did this. Now, this is a great case: we would have pictures; those are zinc oxide - not a wire tree trunks for the nano forests - and they can be grown without even using a heat or flame room, at room temperature, in a dirty vat. You can do this in Africa.

And with just a little bit of genetic engineering, we can connect our proteins and make solar panels out of grass clippings. Ideally, what we would like to do here - we don't really care about replacing silicon solar panels in the Western world - but what we'd like to do is get to the point where we can send somebody just a bag of material that they need to stabilize these proteins that we can create in the lab - and it's non-hazardous, and it's cheap, and inexpensive.

And then, with very low-skilled labor, they go outside of their own community, gather some things, and make their own solar power. So, changing the equation from being only consumers to producers - essentially making solar power, making electricity as easy as cooking. And we're almost there.

And this, we feel, is going to be disruptive - because the number one way out of poverty is nighttime illumination. If you have nighttime illumination, you can educate yourself. The number one way people who have no electricity - the poorest people in the world - have for nighttime illumination is also the most expensive way to get light: they use paraffin candles and kerosene, which is also awful for their health.

So, the people who have the least, and the people who need illumination the most, get to pay the highest amount of money just to have a light. By changing this - by allowing them to have perhaps not the most efficient, but something that can grow and make themselves out of locally available material with ultra-low cost - I think we can change the world.

Now, you'd think: how is that related to smelling cancer? Well, it's essentially the same problem again. We're taking something that exists in nature - namely, the receptors out of human or dog noses - and while before we were taking real plants and extracting them, in this case, everything is synthetic. We know the code from DNA that encodes for the genes that encode for the proteins - and we design everything in the lab.

I push up at design in the computer; I push a button; a couple of days later, I have the folded protein that I need to make an electronic nose. So, this was given to us as a challenge: can you make this? Now, some of the audience - the older ones, perhaps - will remember this: when I was 11 years old, on a big small black and white TV in Athens, I saw this guy holding this for the first time; I saw Star Trek. I was captivated and terrified at the same time.

And I wondered how he did this - and that, at 11 years old, it dawned on me: can't be by light; can't be by radio - because it goes around corners and sniffs out where the people are in the weather waters. And I realized back then: this has got to be a nose of some sort; it's going to smell the things that it's looking for.

So, we look at how nature detects scent - and it ends up being that you have humans, at least, with 391 receptors stuck right here - not here; this is just there to hydrate and warm up the air when you're sniffing something. It is your brain - directly your brain - that does that, gives you this experience. There's a piece of what's called the olfactory bulb that sticks through the skull, through tiny little holes, and sticks and literally hangs in the breeze.

So, whenever you have something, you're actually directly interacting molecules with your brain. We copied this system - and it looks like this right now; it's about this big - and we call it the nano-nose. And just like the dog or the human, it doesn't know any chemistry; it's not an analytical device; it doesn't tell you what things are made of; it just tells you what their smell is.

So, the point of this is: this is the first time we have something like this. There's been many electronic noses before - but in this case, we're not doing analysis; we're not saying: oh, we're trying to find the bomb in the airport, and we're not exactly sure what the bomb material smells like. We're saying: if I have a dog, and I trained the dog to find the rose, then the dog will be able to find me another rose in the flower store - that's all we do.

The dog does not know any chemistry; the dog is not doing analysis; doesn't know; doesn't need to know what the chemicals are of the scent. But the dog can try to find cancer at a very early stage - so that's what we're doing. So, the applications are: of course, we start by wanting to know how olfaction works - it's the last sense that we don't understand; everything else, we understand pretty well - vision, audition, heat, and touch, and taste.

But we still don't really get how olfaction works. And from this work, we actually also found out that at least flies - in addition to looking at the shape of the molecule when they're sniffing - they also look at the vibrational spectrum; which already has made us come up with designs for better noses - not using the biological component at all, but changing it to quantum nanotubes, quantum dots, I should say, and nanotubes, and things like this.

Just like we don't make jet engines out of feathers, eventually, we will not need the biology to do any of these things. We're participating in the Qualcomm XPrize - which is to make exactly that tricorder that Spock was holding; which, in two-and-a-half years from now, will have to be able to put it in the size of a cell phone, give it to a hundred people, and over the period of two weeks, smell these people without interacting with them directly - and be able to tell, with an 85% success rate, 15 different diseases. It will be blind - and we hope we could do this.

So, if you have to take something out of this today, I think that the message is: nature already knows how to fly; how to make electricity; how to compute; how to detect odors, etc. And if nature has shown it to be doable, then it is - it's unavoidable that we will do it. This isn't cold fusion; cold fusion may or may not work - we don't know; we've never seen it in nature.

But to make a device that can fit in a thing like this and sniff cancer - yes, absolutely; it's doable. Not only doable - it's unavoidable; we'll get there whether we like it or not. We already have - whether we're stealing the designs, we're using biological components - but what really biology does is: it allows us atomic precision control over the 118 elements of the periodic table.

Anything that biology can do right now, we're learning to do better, faster, cheaper - and we will go to places where biology never dreamed of. Now, where does that mean? What does the future look like? Well, already, we have a grant based on this work to go to the next level - which is the Star Trek replicator; yes, believe it or not, they are paying me money to build the machine that you can push a button and the cup of tea will materialize out of the 118 elements of the periodic table - without involving any tea plants or ceramics or anything - just atom by atom, put it there.

Not quite there yet; we're in phase one. But within our lifetime, this will happen. You know what else we're doing? We're making machines that self-replicate. Now, this may be scary - and you're probably right to feel like you need some ownership of this. We scientists are sitting out there in our labs; how do you get to participate?

The best way I know of is to ask questions; it's the ultimate equalizer. Scientists love questions - that's what drives us. You can engage a scientist by just asking a good question. And recognizing the importance of questions, we have created the Molecular Frontiers Inquiry Prize - where we award five boys and five girls every year a prize for the best question asked.

We have a panel, including 30 Nobel laureates, that selects the winners. And I'd like to encourage you all to participate in this; it's open to everybody - no matter how old you are, no matter what your background is. Just go to our website, and submit your question - and who knows? You might be one of the winners.

And we're not only doing that - but we're also trying to make science more accessible to everybody. We believe that science should not be just for scientists; it should be for everybody. And by asking questions, you can participate in this process - and feel a sense of ownership of science.

So, please, go ahead - ask your question; submit it to us; and who knows? You might change the world. Thank you.